So now that we've talked
a bit about the concepts
of concurrent and
non-concurrent collectors,
let's delve down a
little and actually
talk about how to implement
non-concurrent and concurrent
collectors.
And this will give you a
sense of how to actually fill
in the various elements,
various methods in the collector
interface.
I think we've talked before,
in the sequential streams
discussion, about the
collector interface
and how it defines
three generic types.
I'll go through this
analysis for completeness,
but it's not much different
from the earlier discussion.
Type T, which stands
for T in the collector
generic interface,
is the type of object
that's available in the stream.
So you could have integer,
string, search result,
whatever.
A stands for accumulator.
And it's the type of the
mutable accumulator object
that's used for collection.
It's basically the mutable
result container, if you will.
For ConcurrentHash maps, sorry,
for concurrent collectors,
we are likely to want to
use concurrent collections,
like ConcurrentHashMap.
You could, conceivably, use
non-concurrent collections
for non-concurrent collectors
like ArrayList and LinkedList,
but make sure you do
not try to use those
for concurrent collectors.
And then, the final type,
R, stands for result.
That's the type of the final
result of the collector, which,
again, could be a
ConcurrentHashSet,
a ConcurrentHashMap, a list
of T, a future to a list of T.
There's all kinds
of different options
here depending on what your
collector is trying to do.
There's also, as
before, five methods
that are defined in the
collector interface.
There's other methods
that are defined,
but these are the five that
are used as factory methods
to help create the
collector that's
used by the Streams Framework.
The characteristics
is a factory method
that gives you a stream
with additional information
to be used for its
internal optimizations.
It's basically storing metadata.
So you can do things like
indicate whether or not
you want the collector to
be unordered, in which case
the collector doesn't have
to preserve in counter order,
or ordered, which
is the default.
A concurrent collector
should be unordered,
but a non-concurrent
collector can be ordered.
There's also the concept
of IDENTITY FINISH, which
basically asks the question,
or indicates whether or not
the finisher method is a
no-op and, therefore, can
be ignored, just return null.
If you set IDENTITY
FINISH, then in that case,
the finisher will not be called
because the accumulator will
have its final values after
we finish accumulating
and combining all the results.
And then, there's also a
flag called concurrent,
which indicates whether
the accumulator can
be called concurrently on
the mutable result container.
Obviously, a concurrent
collector should be concurrent,
but a non-concurrent
collector should not be.
Now, of course, you could have
a non-concurrent collector
use a concurrent
container, but why?
That would be crazy.
As a consequence, the
mutable result container
must be synchronized.
The methods that it uses
to accumulate elements
into the container
have to be protected
by some type of synchronizer.
In the context of
concurrent collections,
the combiner method is a
no-op because we're not
combining anything.
We're basically just
accumulating directly
into a single shared
mutable result container.
Keep in mind, again, a
non-concurrent collector
can be used with either
sequential or parallel streams.
And, internally, the
Streams Framework
takes a look at the properties
that are set on the collector
and then decides how to
ensure the right behavior.
Here's a very simple example of
a factory method implementation
for characteristics
that creates a set that
sets all the various flags,
CONCURRENT, UNORDERED,
and IDENTITY FINISH.
And if you want to
use this in your code,
you can just remove the
ones that you don't need,
and it'll work just fine.
The next factory method
here is the supplier.
And this is used
as a factory method
to generate the empty
result container.
This, of course, is
going to be called
by the Streams Framework.
If you're implementing a
non-concurrent collector,
you can just return a good
old non-concurrent collection,
like an ArrayList.
Here, we provide an ArrayList
as a constructor reference.
If you're using a
concurrent collector,
however, you need
to be returning
a concurrent collection
or a collection that's
been made thread-safe
with proper synchronizers.
As an example, here, we
can use ConcurrentHashSet,
which is a little wrapper
around ConcurrentHashMap
I wrote for some of my examples
to make them easy to work with.
Here's the accumulator.
This is also a
factory method that
returns a BiConsumer that adds
a new element to an existing
result container.
And again, if we're going to
be working with non-concurrent
collectors, we can just return
non-concurrent collection
method references
like List::add.
This doesn't have any
synchronization, of course.
In contrast, if we're using
concurrent collectors,
we're defining
we need a concurrent collection.
And in this case, we could
use ConcurrentHashSet::add,
which is a method reference to
an add method that's properly
synchronized for
ConcurrentHashSet,
in which case, it has
to be synchronized,
which it would be, of
course, in this case.
There's also the
combiner method,
which returns a binary
operator that merges two result
containers together.
This is how you would do it
for a non-concurrent collector.
One way to do it
if you're working
with things like ArrayList.
Keep in mind that
we don't need this
at all for a
concurrent collector.
The combiner method
will never be
called when the concurrent flag
is set, and that, of course,
is because there's
no merging phase.
There's no combining phase.
We're only going to
accumulate things directly
into that thread-safe concurrent
readable result container.
And then, finally, we
have the finisher method,
which returns a function
that converts the result
container to the final
result type, which could just
be Function identity.
If you are tempted to
use Function identity,
then go ahead and
set identity finish
and just return null and make
this whole thing a no-op.
And that'll be perfectly
fine for both concurrent and
non-concurrent collectors.
As I had mentioned
before, finisher
can be a lot more interesting.
You can go ahead
and have finisher
do things like return
CompletableFutures
to all kinds of
other stuff, which
allow you to have a
single point to wait
for processing to finish.